1. Introduction
With the rapid growth of digital communication, ensuring secure transmission of sensitive data has become a crucial challenge. While cryptography hides the content of a message, steganography goes a step further by hiding the very existence of the message itself.

This project focuses on Image Steganography using the Least Significant Bit (LSB) technique to embed secret data into a BMP image and later retrieve it safely.

The project implements two main functionalities:
1. Encoding – Hiding secret file data inside an image.
2. Decoding – Extracting the hidden secret file from the stego-image.

2. Objectives
- To develop a C-based program that can hide any type of file (e.g., .txt, .pdf, .c, etc.) inside a BMP image.
- To ensure the hidden data remains invisible to the human eye while maintaining the image’s visual quality.
- To implement a magic string verification that ensures only intended secret files are decoded.
- To gain hands-on experience with file handling, bit manipulation, and structured programming in C.

3. Methodology
1. Encoding Process:
- Input Files: Source BMP image, Secret file, Output stego-image name
- Steps: Copy BMP header, Embed magic string & its length, Embed file extension & its length, Embed file size, Embed secret data byte by byte, Copy remaining image data.
- Result: A new stego image is generated, visually identical to the original but containing hidden data.

2. Decoding Process:
- Input Files: Stego BMP image, Output file name (without extension)
- Steps: Skip BMP header, Extract & verify magic string, Extract extension length & extension, Extract secret file size, Reconstruct secret file.
- Result: The original secret file is successfully retrieved.

4. Implementation Details
- Programming Language: C
- Key Concepts Used: Bitwise operations (&, |, <<, >>), File handling, Structures, String operations
- Header Files: encode.h, decode.h, types.h
- Modules: Encoding module, Decoding module, Utility module

Execution Process:
1.Encoding
./a.out -e beautiful.bmp secret.txt 
You have choosen encoding
.bmp is present
Secret file with extension '.txt' is present
No stego image name provided, provide a name without extension
new
Enter a magic string (max 19 chars): #*
Magic string is stored
Image capacity is sufficient.
Header is successfully stored
Magic string length is stored successfully
Magic string is stored successfully
Secret file extension length is stored successfully
Secret file extension is successfully stored
Secret file size is successfully stored
Secret file data successfully stored.
Copy remaining image data is successfully stored

Encoding is successfully done....

2.Decoding
./a.out -d new.bmp output
You have choosen decoding
.bmp is present
Skipping header successfully
Magic string length is successfully decoded
Magic string is successfully decoded

Enter the magic string used during encoding: #*
Magic string verified. Proceeding with decoding
Secret file extension length is successfully decoded
Secret file extension is successfully decoded
Secret file size is successfully decoded
Decoded output file opened successfully.
Secret file data successfully decoded.

Decoding is successfully done....